ODD Protocol for Soldier Ant Decisions – Model Number 1
by Greta Gadbois
February 2, 2015

Purpose:
The purpose of this model is to explore the various ways soldier ants choose to or not to guard cavities during the process where the colony is expanding from one nest to many.

Entities, State Variables, and Scales:
The model has two kinds of entities: soldier ants and cavities. The ants are characterized by their location and their current action, either exploring or guarding a cavity. When ants are exploring they move until they find a cavity. When they find a cavity, the ant can choose to guard the cavity, which means to stand still at the cavity. The cavities will appear in a grid formation, and each cavity can have either large or small volume and has an entrance that is either narrow or wide. They are also characterized by whether they are guarded or not, and if they are being guarded, by how many ants. In this model, all of the cavities will be appear to be the same size, despite the different volumes and entrance widths, so that each type will be found at the same rate by the ants. There is also one home cavity where all the ants are located at the beginning of the simulation. Ants will not be able to guard this cavity, as the soldier ants that I am representing in this model are only the deployed soldiers.

Process, Overview, and Scheduling
During each time step, each ant will do one action, either guard a cavity, or explore. While the ant is guarding, it remains still located on the cavity. While an ant explores, it moves one step.  The order in which the ants execute their actions is unimportant because there are no interactions among the ants.

Design Concepts:
The basic principle explored by this model is the emergence of an optimal or near optimal colonial defensive strategy from the simple behaviors of individual ants. This model hopes to show how ants choose to guard certain cavities to provide an optimal or near optimal set of sufficiently guarded cavities for the colony.
We will explore various decision making process for ants. In this iteration, we will use a “dumb as a brick” process, where the ant will choose to guard the first large-sized, narrow-entranced cavity that it finds. This behavior is based on the understanding that maintaining larger cavities (able to store more brood and food) and makes the colony more fit, and that narrow entranced cavities require fewer ants to successfully guard them, thus leaving more soldiers able to guard more cavities, making the colony more fit. There is no learning in this model.
Sensing is important in this model. The ants will be able sense weather they have found a cavity, the size of that cavity, and the entrance size of that cavity.
This model does not include interactions between ants, including whether or not a cavity is already being guarded. Interactions may be added in later iterations.
	Stochasticity is used in this model to randomize the locations of the various cavities on the grid. All cavities will be located at the intersections of a regular (and imaginary/invisible) 4x4 grid in order to be able to more easily compare the results of the model with previous ant experiments done by Powell and Dornhouse 2013. Stochasticity is also used during ant movement, while ants are exploring.
The collective of the colony is somewhat represented in this model. We show only the relevant ants in the colony, not the entire colony, with the expectation that from these ants, the colony’s defensive and reproductive fitnesses will emerge. 
We will collect information by outputting graphs at the end of the simulation that show (1) the number of ants at each defended cavity, and the (2) volume and (3) entrance width of those defended colonies. We will also be sure to keep track of the number and types of cavities that were available for expansion. With that information we will give the colony a rating of fitness, and also a rating of fitness vs. best possible fitness, as a way to compare this model to other ant decision-making models, as well as to real ants. The equation that we will use to find colony fitness and optimal colony fitness is given in Donaldson-Matasci 2014. 

Initialization:
	The location, size, and entrance width of each cavity is initialized when the model starts. The ants are initialized at the home cavity, facing a random direction.

Input data:
	The user will input the number of soldier ants, and the number of each type of empty cavity (large-narrow, large-wide, small-narrow, small-wide), where the combined number of empty cavities must not exceed 15.

Submodels:
	Ant movement in the explore state will be random, and as done in the provided NetLogo Ant Foraging model, where at each time step the ant “wiggles” (turns right a random number of degrees less than or equal to 40, then turns left a random number of degrees less than or equal to 40) then moves forward one.


